# ASP.NET Core Server Architecture

Asp.net core (2.x , 3.x, 5.x ..) is architected to be flexible, fast and versatile. The goal is not only support legacy scenarios and windows only solutions but also cutting edge, advanced and cross platform scenarios as well.
It is done in architectural choices of Framework, Web Server and Handling internet traffic.

## Framework

There are two framework choices for asp.net core to be running on:

1. Legacy windows only .NET Framework which is compatible with older libraries and legacy codes
2. Cross Platform .NET Framework (.net core or .net 5+) which is faster, more optimized and generally recommended if possible

## Server

Asp.net Core apps run on top of a server library which is similar to the OWIN self-hosted model. The server itself contains the code that translate raw HTTP requests into the structures that asp.net core is looking for.
Asp.net core 2.0 and later ships with two different servers:

1. **HTTP.sys** : windows server only. HTTP.sys includes a couple of features that Kestrel doesn't have like Windows authentication. Consider using HTTP.sys if you exclusively run on Windows servers and need these additional features. The ASP.NET Core documentation outlines all the features that HTTP.sys supports. 
2. **Kestel** : it is open source, cross platform and optimized web server. Therefore, it usually is the best choice. It's been highly optimized and it's incredibly fast. When you create a new project from the built-in templates in Visual Studio or the .NET cli, you get Kestrel by default. 

## Handling internet Traffic

Both Kestrel and HTTP.sys can serve traffic directly, sometimes called acting as an edge server, or sit behind a load balancer or reverse proxy:

1. Edge Server: running on edge server has some advantages specially on low powered simple devices like IoT devices but exposing your server directly have some issues including security risks and scalability issues (e.g. load balancing, traffic routing ...)
2. Reverse proxy: Another approach is to put your server behind a reverse proxy like IIS or Nginx. The reverse proxy can act as a load balancer and it also acts as a single place to configure certificates for HTTPS even if you have multiple servers behind the proxy.

### What is the difference between a host and a server?

The host is responsible for application startup and lifetime management. The server is responsible for accepting HTTP requests. Part of the host’s responsibility includes ensuring the application’s services and the server are available and properly configured. You can think of the host as being a wrapper around the server. The host is configured to use a particular server; the server is unaware of its host.
