[Path]: p "Frontend Developer,Backend Developer,Data Scientist"
[Topic]: t "CS"
[Cert]: c

# Computer Hardware Basics

This is probably the most concise introduction to computer hardware you can ever find anywhere.

Any Computer regardless of the power, size and form-factor consists of few basic component in order to Store, Process and transfer data. Data either transferred into another device or computer for further processing or turns into human friendly information which is either displayed on a screen, played back from speaker or audio device.

Therefore, there are four Basic components that any Computer will have:

1. **Processor** :

    It is typically at the heart of any computer or board and as the name stands its job is to process information typically in binary format. it also called by other names such as micro-processor, CPU (central processing unit) or GPU (graphical processing unit) if the main task is to process graphical data.

    Most cpu/gpu these days are capable of processing billions of binary operation per seconds and have two main components which affects their performance:
      1. *Clock Speed*: how fast they can process information and typically measured in GHZ (Giga Hertz)
      2. *Cores*: how many units inside CPU can perform in parallel or work simultaneously each at the given clock speed. the more cores you have, the more effective bandwidth you will have that can be used.

    The easiest way to understand the concept of cores and clock speed is to think about a highway as a computer. If you imagine cars as data, and toll or police checkpoint as processor. in order to process more cars or increase efficiency is to increase the speed of processing in each station (clock speed) and increase the stations or lanes in the highway (cores) which then both affect the traffic and efficiency.

    Processors have architecture that they have been designed based on and the most popular architectures for CPUs are X86 which was developer by intel and ARM (Advanced Risk Machine) which was originally developed by Acorn Computers.

    Additionally, depending on processor's architecture and manufacturing fabrication size, processor's efficiency may dramatically change. Since the building block of processors are tiny transisors, the rule of thumb is that the smaller the manufacturing fabrication process size for those transistors, the more power efficient it is. Those size are typically measured at nano-meter or nm for sure. Currently intel could produce CPUs as small as 10nm whereas ARM processors have achieved as small as 5nm processors.

2. **Memory** :

    Data that is going to be processed by the processor has to come from somewhere right? Whether its a live data stream, or it is stored somewhere in a permanent location, we need memory to temporarily store these information that is going to be processed by the processor. Memory typically very close to Processor in order to maximize efficiency its tightly coupled with CPU with dedicated and direct bus. Such memories with high performance/bandwidth is also referred to as **RAM** short for Random Access Memory. There are also permanent storage option available for computers to store/save data even when the power goes out. These memory are Solid State Storage (without moving part) which are evolved from NAND flash based storage or legacy disk drives that has physical discs that spins and data is stored with tiny magnets. Legacy disk drives are typically slower and more prone to data corruption compared to SSD disks but SSD drives are much more expensive.

    Memory performance is also measured with the speed which is also measured with GHZ similar to CPU and the number of direct channels that they have with CPU.

    One side note that X86

3. **Network Interface** :

    Computer can be an isolated tiny boards or even full computers that work in isolated mode. Infact, older computers did not even have network interface, but after computers became popular it was quickly revealed that the most interesting things computers can do is to communicate with other computers and systems and transfer data/messages from one computer to another either on the same network or over the internet. Therefore, most computers these days whether its a tiny board, a smartphone or big computers comes equipped with Network Interface Card (or NIC for short) which enables them to communicate with other computers on the network or internet. Network Interface also called *Modem* can be in any form such as Wireless, Wired, or even Cellular modem present in mobile devices.

4. **Input/Output** :

    Input/output or I/O for Short is a set of components such as computer network components , electronics component or even data storage) to read/transfer/write data to/from user or from one system to another. Just like memory and cpu, Input/Output performance also affects overall system performance specially for tasks with a lot of data read/write volumes.
